
=head1 caveat emptor

This document supposes you know NQP and the QAST API.  It is in state of flux
so it contains both raw thoughts, inconsistencies and fossils.
Parts of the doc that are more glossary like probably have a more consistent
terminology.

The implementation is not yet public or in very experimental form in dirty
git branches in L<https://github.com/cognominal/nqp>. Pod formating is missing
all over the place.  The document purposes are multiple. It will eventually turn
into a user guide but it is currently geared at explaining the choices made and
driving the implementation. It may still contain cryptic notes to my own usage.
And here and there, there are apparently random code pastes that are or may prove relevant
to the design or implementation.


=head1 C<ast> and C<atm> : 2 slangs to deal with ASTs

In the rakudo toolkit, like in other compiler toolkits, after a parsing pass, a
compiler generates an abstract syntax tree (AST) and statically optimizes it.
Downward operations are specific to the backend and are beyond the scope of this
doc. By nature, the API to generate the AST is very regular and very verbose.
Error prone to write and hard to read. Let us use slangs to the rescue !

Slangs are Perl 6 parlance for DSL. Unlike most DSLs, many slangs can
be artfully weaved within the main language.

A good introduction to DSLs is
https://www.dmst.aueb.gr/dds/pubs/jrnl/2000-JSS-DSLPatterns/html/dslpat.pdf.

To generate an AST, we will use the C<ast> slang. To pattern match within an AST
tree, we will use the C<atm> slang, atm meaning I<ast tree matching>. In these
doc, we will suppose the main language to be nqp. Few modifications to the
examples will be necessary to make it Perl 6.

The ast and atm slangs are named after the phaser keyword that introduce them.

We are starting very slowly, in a pointillist fashion which may frustrating
to some. If you are not faint of heart, to catch the big picture go to
directly L<Full fledged example>.

Code in the ast slang is introduced by the phaser C<AST>
    AST 42;

We will often drop the C<QAST> to talk about the classes of
the QAST API. So we will say C<IVal> instead of C<QAST::IVal>.

Compiling C<AST::42> will result in executing code equivalent to

   QAST::Op.new( :op<callmethod>, :name<new>,
       QAST::Wval.new(:value(QAST::IVal),
          QAST::IVal.new(:value(42))));

Which will result in creating the code for generating an C<IVal>.

     QAST::IVal.new(:value 42);


Code in the atm slang is introduced by the phaser C<ATM>.

    ATM 42;       # 1 if $_ is the QAST::Ival for 42
    ATM $_ ~~ 42  # equivalent form

Combining the two slangs, below, if the value of C<$_> is the
C<IVal> for 42, we replace it by the evil C<IVal> for 666.

    AST 666 if ATM 42

The two slangs are deliberately similar even if one is aimed at generating ASTs
while the other at matching them; or to be precise, ast slang is used to
generate ASTs, while the atm slang pattern matches (part of) AST (sub)trees.
Also, in the simplest cases, ast and atm syntaxes mimic nqp to make the learning
curve less steep. As an intended result, ast and atm provides huffmanizations
similar to nqp. But don't be fooled, ast is just a slang generating an AST, and
atm to pattern match an AST.

=head2 Some more examples of ast slang.

ast slang can express QAST node either in short form or,
if available for the given node type, in terse form.
The normal form being using the QAST API instead of the
ast slang.

    AST 42          # terse form
    AST IVal 42     # short form

    # generates nqp::say(42)
    AST say 42      # terse within terse
    AST Op say 42   # terse with short

    # generates say(42)
    AST &say(42)    # terse within terse
    AST Call say 42  # tricky, really an Op node

C<nqp::> calls are more common than function calls so the syntax is shorter.

=head3 Constructing piecemeal an ast

   my $ast := AST 42;
   AST say $ast;      # $ast is an NQP/Perl 6 variable interpolated in ast

Within ast or atm. every code parsed by the NQP/Perl 6 rule C<Variable> can be
interpolated just like it is in an double quoted expression. Here we interpolate
a var containing an C<int>, so we must use a short form. A conversion is done,
so we can pass a any value which is intify-able.

    my int $i := 42;
    AST say Ival $i;

    my @a = (AST 1), (AST 2);
    AST  &say(@a)

=head2 Motivating example

As a motivating and running example, we use a program with a dead branch
and some of its variations.

Below, the C<$french> variable is known at compile time
so the program is equivalent to C<nqp::say $salut>.

   const $french = 1;
   nqp::say $french ?? 'salut' !! 'hi'

The resulting tree is equivalent to the following one generated using
the QAST API.

   QAST::Op.new(:op<say>,
       QAST::Op.new(:op<if>, QAST::IVal.new(:value(1),
         QAST::SVal.new(:value<salut>), QAST::SVal.new(:value<hi>)))

    AST if($french, 'salut', 'hi')

Replacing the constant C<$french> by its value, the code becomes

   AST say if 0,  'salut', 'hi'

The ast slang provides syntactic sugar for opcodes that implement control flow

   AST say     0 ??  'salut' !!  'hi'
   AST say     if 0  { 'salut' } else { 'hi' }

If we wanted to generate a call to the C<&say> function as opposed
to the C<say> opcode we would have written:

   AST &say(  0 ??  'salut' !!  'hi' )

Now, let's do our faking of dead code elimination.

   my $if :=  AST  0 ?? 'salut' !! 'hi' # generate the tree

   $if := (ATM 0) ?? AST $if[1] !!  AST $if[2]                    # optimize it
   $if := ATM 0   ??     $if[1] !!      $if[2];                   # same, smarter

=head2 Some more splicing

Splicing is used to pass information from the surrounding environment to the
slang. Here it is an AST subtree, later the name of a variable to be generated,
or a string to be interpolated in a double quoted string.

   my $french = 1;
   my $if :=  AST if $french { 'salut' } else { 'hi' }
   $if := ATM 0 ?? $if[1] !! $if[2];

The C<$french> variable is a compile time entity, In the generated tree a
C<QAST::IVal> with value C<1> appears in its place. More example of variable
interpolation in the ast slang.

   my $op := 'say';
   my $s  := 'Tom';
   AST Op $op "hi $s"; # the opcode is given by the value of $op

The last line is equivalent to

   AST Op $op concat 'hi',   $s;
   AST Op $op         'hi' ~ $s; # maybe

Now, we want a function call

   my $name := 'say';
   AST Op :name($name) 'hi'


   AST Call $name  'hi'
   AST &$name  'hi'


=head2 Generating a Var

Now suppose C<$french> is a lexical variable to appe ar in the compiled source
code. So it is now an altogether different beast which lives at a diferent time.
There is still a dead branch, but to detect it one needs to do control flow
analysis. It would prouve that $$french can only be 1 in the second statement.

We would manually generate the code using

   AST { bind( $$french :decl :my, 1);  if $$french { 'salut' } else { 'hi' }}

We want the binding operation to standout. There is an obvious syntax for that.

   AST { $$french :decl :my :=1; if $$french { 'salut' } else { 'hi' }}

Note the doubled sigil in C<$$french>, even if the generated variable is
C<$french>. Also note the bracing C<{ I<...> }>, an huffmanization to avoid an
explicit C<Stmts( I<...> )>. A C<Block> would be written using double braces
C<{{ I<...> }}>.

The previous ast code is equivalent to the QAST code:

 QAST::Stmts.new(
   QAST::Op.new(:op<bind>,
       QAST::Var.new(:name<$french>, :scope<lexical>, :decl<var>)),
       QAST::IVal.new(:value(1)),
   QAST::Op.new(:op<call>, :name<say>,
       QAST::Op.new(:op<if>, QAST::Var.new(:name<$french>, :scope<lexical>),
         QAST::SVal.new(:value<salut>), QAST::SVal.new(:value<hi>))))


We don't need to hardcode the name of the generated var. Below it is passed as the
value of $<lang>.

     my $lang = 'french';
     AST { $$lang :decl :my :name($lang) :=1;  if $$lang { 'salut' } else { 'hi' }}

Also the syntax is streamlined.  C<:my> stands for the C<:scope<lexical>> and the
C<:decl> stands for C<:decl<var>> while C<:param> would stand for C<:decl<param>.
Also within an phaser, we don't need to repeat the adverb for a given variable
because the phaseer remembers them.

We can further streamline C<$$lang:name($lang)> into C<$$$lang>.

We have hardly scratched the surface of our two slangs. But now, you know the
gist of them. You should figure out from existing code. Also, to eat our own dog
food, atm is implemented using many AST phasers. So tasty you want to carry the
dog food in a doggy bag !

The extensibility relies on the possibility to dynamically add new instructions
to the bytecode. This can be done from a dynamically linked library.

According to the L<water bed|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waterbed_theory>, the
QAST API simplicity means: code using it is verbose. The analysis of existing
code relying on the QAST API now allows to design a huffmanizing syntax.

So Slast is part of an effort to huffmanize the compiler code. It does not
affect what is generated. slast does not invalidate existing code. This spec
also documents C<nqp-lite> and the C<atm> slang because, when possible, they use similar
conventions.

As any good DSL, slast huffmanizes special purpose code. This comes at
the cost of learning additional conventions.  When dealing with code,
the writer and reader are not bogged down with details irrelevant to
them. Using the AST phaser, slast code is tightly weaved into an host
language (HL) to generate ASTs for code compiled from a source
language (SL).

     code in source        HL with AST phasers
     language         ------------------------------------->   QAST Tree

slast appears

=head1 Le mot et la chose

We continue Jonathan's tradition to name programs using slavic names. Beside
meaning I<B<sl>ang B<AST>>, Slast is czek for pleasure and is apparented to sladký,
russian for sweet.  Slast is sweet indeed.
Depensing on context, we use slast to denote the ast slang, or both ast and atm slangs.


=head1 Full fledged example

The first example is extreme because all C<QAST::Nodes> appears in their
terse form, meaning their class name C<QAST::Op> does not appear.  Below
C<hllize I<...>> is the terse form equivalent to the short form
C<Op('hllize', I<...>)>.  With the QAST API, that would be
C<QAST::Op.new(:op<hllize>, I<...>)>.
We explain the example, glossing over many details.

The example is a
L<translation|https://github.com/rakudo/rakudo/blob/386905f6f62f9fa3525c887a8a86fa48b22b4b35/src/Perl6/Actions.nqp#L350-L368>
tp slast of real code. That code generates code for the C<.^> operator.
The four lines of the AST phaser replaces sixteen lines of bureaucratic QAST code.


    register_op_desugar('p6callmethodhow', -> $qast {
      $qast   := $qast.shallow_clone();
      AST {
        $$temp :decl :unique<how_invocant> := $qast.shift;
        hllize (how $$temp)->($qast.name)($$temp, |$qast);
      }
    }


The ast code is introduced by the AST phaser. It seamlessly mixes generated vars
(genvars) and HL vars. Genvars slast names have doubled sigils to distinguish
them from HL vars. Every HL postcircumfix expression appears directly in slast
code. We recognize them because they start with an HL var name; here, this is
true of C<$qast.shift> and C<$qast.name>.

C<QAST::Op> nodes appears as simple fonction calls, here
C<hllize> and C<how>. Their arguments don't need to be parenthesed.

C<< $$temp :unique<how_invocant> >> creates a genvar declaration using
C<QAST::Node.unique> to generate a unique genvar name from
C<'how_invocant'>.

When convenient, ast mimics the Perl 6 syntax albeit often with some variations.
Here C<:=> stands for C<< QAST::Op.new(:op<bind>) >>; The C<< -> >> arrow stands
for C<< QAST::Op.new(:name<methodcall>) >> and C<< {{ I<...> }} >> for a C<<
QAST::Block.new(I<...>) >>. Note the C<< -> >> for generated method calls is
often necessary to distinguish generated method calls from HL method calls.

Finally, the stitching of QAST subtrees held by  HL vars is made easier with
C<|$qast>, here to form the arguments of the method call.

Finally, while concise, the slast expression is more explicit than its QAST API
based counterpart because C<$qast.name> makes clear that the method name is set
by the code which create C<$qast>. We could not use it if it was not set somewhere.

=head2 round-tripping dumper

slast comes with a dumper (TBD) so one can round trip. But looking at a dump,
you would miss one slast defining feature, being driven by informations from
the host language.

A good syntax highlighter should use a different background for slast
zones and revert to the normal background for HL sub-zones within slast.
To reformulate a previous statement, these sub-zones are absent in a slast dump.
Slast syntax is so slick these sub-zones don't need explicit splice syntax.

=head1 Variables

Slast is an AST generator language:

=item with a concise syntax for expressing AST nodes
=item driven by information from the host language

In this section, we will gloss over the slast AST node syntax except for
C<QAST::Var>s because, in the given examples, it will mirror the syntax of the
source language so no introduction is necessary. We will focus on the fact that
slast deals with two kind of variables: HL vars and generated C<QAST::Var>s.


=head2 slast concept and vocabulary

=for design
Existing rakudo and nqp code with the QAST API repeat the scope at each var instance.
We don't want that in slast.  C<decl> declares a new variable which is
C<:> scope,  for register.  The kind of scope being open ended. So instead of
C<reg $$a>, we write C<decl $$a :reg>, so we introduce only one
keyword. Doc needs updating to reflect that change.
braid as a verb or noun to denotes the interpenetration of different
languages.
I don't like the term host language. Host is used for VM and also for
internet nodes.

I<slast> is the language introduced by the C<AST> phaser to avoid the top heavy QAST
API normally used to generate an AST tree.

The I<source language> (SL) is the language which is compiled and for which
slast generated a parse tree. I<source code> is code in source language.

The I<host language> is the code in which the compiler code is written.
Slast is breaded into the host language.

A I<source var> is a var that explicitely appears in the source code.

A I<HL var> is an host language var used within slast. It must be a
lexical var with a sigil.  An HL var is used to pass information to
slast.  An HL var is a compile time only entity.

A I<source var> explicitely appears in the source language.

A I<genvar> is a generated C<QAST::Var>. HLL like Perl 6 have
many genvars wich have no direct source var counterpart.
A genvar name may not have the morphology of a Perl
variable name with a sigil.

An I<SL var> is a slast language var. It is a device to talk about
genvars   The slast code can be run many times during compilation so the
denotated genvar var is well defined at a given time but can change over
time. In other words many genvars can  be generated fron the same SL var.


HL and SL vars start by a sigils, but the sigil is doubled in the SL vars,
so they can be interpolated within a double
quoted string. HL vars are interpolated at compile time while SL and genvars are
at runtume.

The SL var C<$$nominal> is used to create a a genvar named C<$nominal>.
The genvar name is obtained by dropping a sigil from the SL var name.
You may want to explicitely specify the genvar name.

=head3 examples

A fancy way to implement C<my $nominal = 'nominal; say "cog$nominal">.
Sourced genvar C<$nominal> is automatically derived
from SL var C<$$nominal>. HL var C<$cog> is interpolated at compile time.

  my $cog = 'cog';
  AST { $$nominal :decl := 'nominal'; say "$cog$$nominal }

From the C<$$var> SL var, e generate thre genvars C<$zero One two>
using the C<:name($_)> adverb.
Not all of them have Perl 6 morphology.

  my $i := 0;
  my @asts;
  push @asts, AST $var :name($_) :decl for  < $zero 0ne two >




=head2 Some more examples using variables

=note
The HL var must be declared C<int>, C<num> or C<foo>
or assumed to be a QAST::Node.

Below is a previous example but with a variation.
C<AST -{  I<...>  }> (note the dash) generates a
C<Statements> node while C<AST { I<...> }> generates
a C<Block> node outside the C<Statements> node. Probably
the C<statement> node may be ommitted if the block contains
only
The C<:decl> adverb declares the variable. It would be
C<:param>. The default scope is local, so here the C<:loc>
adverbe is implit. It would be C<:my> for a lexical.

   my $cog = 'cog';
   AST = -{ $$nominal :decl := 'nominal';  say "$cog$$nominal" }


This is equivalent to :

    my $foo = 'cog';
      QAST::Stmts.new(
         QAST::Op.new(:op<bind>,
           QAST::Var.new(:name<>, :decl<var>),
           QAST::SVal.new(:value('nominal'))
         ),
         QAST::Op(:op<say>,
           QAST::Op(:op<call>, :name< <&infix:<~> >>),
             QAST::SVal.new(:value($foo)),
             QAST::Var.new(:name<$bar>)
      )
    )

In the previous example, the SL var name is  C<$$nominal>
and the genvar name is  C<$nominal>. We can't derive genvar name
from a SL var name if the later does not have Perl var morphology

   my str $cog = 'cog';
   AST {
      $$nomonql :decl :local :genvar<?bork> ' := 'nominal';
      say "$foo$$bar"
   }

   my str $cog = 'cog';
   for 0..2 {
      AST (
        $$nomina :decl :unique := 'nominal';
        say "$cog$$nominal";
      )
   }

   my str $cog = 'cog';
   AST (
        $nominal_1 :decl := 'nominal1';
        say "$cog$$nominal";
        $$nominal_2 :decl := 'nominal2';
        say "$cog$$nominal";
      )
   }


We will say more about SL vars later. We just wanted to early hammer out the
relationship between SL vars, HL vars and genvars.

=head2 Double quoting

slast double quoting is special because it handles interpolation of both HL and SL vars.
No special syntax is needed. HL and SL vars start with a
sigil.  Double quoting exceptional syntactical compactness makes it a
powerful huffmanization device. It is double special in slast because
we need to interpolate both HL vars and SL vars.  :s :a :h adverbs
affects the interpolation of HL vars while their uppercase
counterparts affects SL vars.

    $a      HL var
    $$a     SL var

=begin implementation
HLL::Grammar.quote_EXPR

according to the received adverbs, C<quote_EXPR> sets C<%*QUOTEMOD> that is checked
by C<quotemod_check> used as an assertion in
rules of the category  quote_escape.



    token quotemod_check(str $mod) {
        <?{ %*QUOTEMOD{$mod} }>
    }



=end implementation

Also, one should be able to say if a postcircumfix operator is SL or HL
As in normal double quoting, parenthesis are needed in the last occurrence
of chained method calls.

+        [ BVal | Block | CompUnit | CompileTimeValue | Ival | InLinePlaceHolder
+        | Nval | Op | ParamTypeCheck | Regex | Sval | SpecialArg | Stmt | Stmts | Unquote
+        | VM | Var | VarWitthFallback | Wval | Want ]
+    }


=head2 SL and slast expressions

One can splice HL code within slast code.
Below the C<nqp::rand> is executed at compile time.

   AST { $$a :decl := {{{ nqp::rand() }}};

=head2 Method calls

Assuming in slast C<$$a = 42> and in HL C<my $a = 33>
C<$a> is SL var so it really translate to a constant at run time
if not constant folded at during compile time or run time optimization.
For the sake of the example, we suppose that the HL has <.perl> methods (which
it has not!).

  print $a.perl           # 33.perl
  print $a.perl()         # 33         .perl executed at compile time
  print $a->perl()        # 33         ->perl executed at run time
  print $a->perl->perl()  # "33"       like .perl.perl executed at run time

When chaining postcircumfix, if the invocant is a runtime entity, there is no
way for the postcircumfix at its right be a compile time entity, so it must be a
runtime one. Because there is no ambiguity for the attentive reader, t
he C<< -> >> can be written as a C<.>.

  print "$a->perl.perl()"  # "33"       like .perl.perl executed at run time
  print "$$a->perl()"         42        -> ok
  print "$$a.perl()"          42       ...but not needed, $$a is SL
  print "$$a.perl.perl()"  # "42"      like $$a.perl.perl executed at run time


=head1 Typical examples

     $past := AST $lhs_ast->STORE: $rhs_ast :nosink

     # without
     $past := QAST::Op.new(
        :op('callmethod'), :name('STORE'),
        $lhs_ast, $rhs_ast);
     $past.annotate('nosink', 1);

     # with
     #  NAST is a phaser, that adds generated code for :node($/)
     NAST $node->words( autoderef => 1 )->Slip;

     # without
       QAST::Op.new(
           :op('callmethod'),
           :name('Slip'),
           QAST::Op.new(
               :op('callmethod'),
               :name('words'),
               :node($/),
               $node,
               QAST::IVal.new( :value(1), :named('autoderef') )
           )
       )



=head1 simple examples for C<nqp::>, function and method calls

In the examples. the SL is a nqp-ish language.

   nqp::say('Hi!')                                      # SL
   AST say('Hi!')                                       # slast
   QAST::Op.new: :op<say>, QAST::SVal.new: :value<Hi!>  # AST

   say('Hi!')
   AST &say('Hi!')
   QAST::Op.new: :op<call>, QAST::SVal.new: :value<Hi!>

   'Hi!'.say
   AST 'Hi!'->say
   QAST::Op.new: :op<callmethod>, :name<say>, :value<Hi!>

Using C<< -> >> to generate a method call lets us
splice HL method calls in slast using C<.>, so without any syntactic overhead.


=head2 HL variables and expressions within slast

One can use HL variables to pass AST subtrees from the HL to the AST phaser.

     my QAST::Node $ast = AST 'Hi!';
     AST say($ast);

In fact one can use any postcircumfix expression starting with a HL variable,
the method call example mentionned before:

     AST say $/<key>.ast

This avoids to use an intermediary variable

     my $ast := $/<key>.ast
     AST say $ast

or the top ugly explicit splicing

     AST say {{{ $/<key>.ast }}}


With a contextual prefix, one can pass a non AST value to the phaser that
converts it to the type implied by the prefix to generate the appropriate QAST
subtree:

     my Str $str = 42;
     AST say(+$str);

Again, that works with HL postcircumfix expressions

     AST +$/<key>

=head2 SL variables

Creating C<QAST::Var>s is easy too.

   AST $$/->ast

Code SL :
     my $var-name := 42 ; nqp::say($var-name)


=head2 SL var declarators and adverb

:param>
C<:lex>, C<:lexref>, C<:ocal>,  C<:attr>

:flat, :slurpy


=head2 unique vars


We need unique vars that span AST expressions



=head2 SL variable and lexpads

When declared, infos about a var are automatically added to
the current block symbol table, called a lexpad.
Infos for subsquent instances of a var are looked in the englobing lexpads.

By default a var scope is lexical and its decl attribute is var.

C<XAST I<foo>> is short for C<self.cur_lexpad()[0].push: AST I<foo>>.


=head2 Adverbs and node named parameters

In an AST phaser, adverbs have the same syntax as Perl 6 but do not appear in the same position.
Unlike adverbs, named parameters appear directly after a parenthesis or a comma.
The C<< => >> syntax is reserved for generating pairs not adverbs, so
the two forms are equivalent

  AST key => 1
  QAST::Ival(:value(1), :named(1))


=head3 Node named parameters
    my $say = 'say';
    AST {{ :immediate Op($say, 42) :node($/) }}

   NAST {{ :immediate Op($say, 42) }}

=head3 Annotations as adverbs

Annotation are expressed as adverbs

     sub block_closure($code) {
       AST $closure.p6capturelex($code->clone) :pasblock($code) :code_object($code)
     }


Literals generate the corresponding AST code.
If you want a literal to be just that within slast, prefix it by the appropriate
pseudo prefix.

    :answer(42)     # the answer annotation is the AST for 42
    :answer(+42)    # the answer annotation is 42

    # the answer annotation is 42
    my $int := 42;
 l    AST $ast :answer(!+int)

    # the answer annotation is the AST for 42
    my $int := 42;
    AST $ast :answer(+int)


=head2 Annotated SL vars

=note section to be fleshed out

the code in parentheses for the value of the pair is implicitely spliced,
it is SL code. Not AST code
    AST $$/ :flat(1)

In that case, we can use the pair syntax with the implicit 1 value

    AST $$/ :flat

Parentheses must be used to separate variable adverbs and expression annotation
when the expression is an adverbed var.

    AST ($/ :flat) :comment<a-match>

=head2 Quick summary

Within an AST phaser, vars and literals, with or without prefix, a summary:

     42                    # generates the AST for 42
     +42                   # really a literal
     $var                  # no prefix. $var is a HL var containing an AST
     +$var                 # cast a HL var to generate a QAST::IVal
     !+$var                # casted HL var is used as is, say, in an annotation
                           # with eponymous sigilname
        $$var              # generates Var with name $$var
        $$$var             # genereates VAR with name given by HL var $var
          :unique<aname>          # name passed thru QAST::Node.unique
     expr :note<foo>     # .annotate('note', 'foo')



=head2 

For simple code, slast code often deceptively looks like source code
when AST phaser components can be expressed in their terse form.
So far, we have only seen terse forms. Some AST nodes have no terse form,
QAST::Op nodes have many.

Node short forms are a simplified form of the corresponding QAST API
with some parameters that were named becoming positional.

Implementation note : probably, they will use a derived node type so that the new
method will not use named parameters opening optimizing opportunities


       AST 42                        # terse form
       AST Ival(+42)                 # short form with positional
       QAST::IVal.new(:value(42))

So why a short form when a terse one is available ?
When the node is dependent on HL vars, you must use the
the short form.

    nqp::say( 42 );                                     # source form
    QAST::Op.new: :op<say>, QAST::IVal.new: :value(42)  # AST form
    AST say 42;                                         # terse form
    AST Op('say', +42)                                   # short form

if the Op name is given by an HL variable, then he can't use the
terse form

    my $say = 'say'
    AST Op(~$say, 42);  #  one must use the short form.


=head2 correspondance between forms depending on node type

       short form                                   source form       terse form
       IVal(+42)                                     42                42
       NVal(+42.0)                                   42.0              42.0
       SVal(~'42')                                   '42'              '42'
       WVal(Forty::Two)                             Forty::Two        Forty::Two
                                                    { 42 }            {{ 42 }}
       Stmts                                                          {  42  }
       NodeList(...)                                                   [ ...  ]
       Op('call', :name<&say>, +42)                 say(42)           &say(42)
       Op('say', +42)                               nqp::say(42)      say(42)
       Op('callmethod>' :name<&say>, +42)           42.say            42.say
       Op('if', IVal(42), IVal(33), IVal(666))      42 ?? 33 !! 666   if 42 { 33 } else { 666 }

A terse form may do more than the short form.
For example the terse form for a block does execute a push_lexpad wich generated
an AST with a QAST::Stmts withing QAST::Block witch is pushed on the lexpad
stack.


   nqp::bindattr($code_obj, $code_type, '$!clone_callback', nqp::null());
   $code_obj.'$!clone_callback' ::= null


when using annotation on a construct that uses adverbs,
parenthesize that construct. Today this is only true of
SL vars

(\@ARGS :flat(1)) :an-annotation<annotated>

NAST ...    NAST :node($/)


=head2 fake node types

The QAST has few node type and uses named parameters to distinguish
subnode types. Slast allows but does not oblige to promote subnode types
for sake of concision.

   Op(:name<call>, 'say' ... )
   Call(~'say', ... )
   say()

   MethodCall(~'say', ... )
   Op(:name<say>,)

   Regex( :rxtype(alt), ... )
   RxAlt( ... )

=head2 More huffmanizing for the win

=note nqp-lite is another project.

Often, combined with nqp-lite, slast allows to make code symmetry apparent.
Below the two first actions use slast and nqp lite while the third is unchanged.
Being unilines, it is easy to vertically align identical structures.

      act backslash:sym<r>  { make can($/.CURSOR, 'parsing_heredoc')  ??  AST "\r"   !! "\r";     }
      act backslash:sym<rn> { make can($/.CURSOR, 'parsing_heredoc')  ??  AST "\r\n" !! "\r\n";   }
      method backslash:sym<t>($/) {
          make nqp::can($/.CURSOR, 'parsing_heredoc')
              ?? QAST::SVal.new( :value("\t") )
              !! "\t";
      }

In the previous example C<act> made implicit the first parameter C<$/>. Here
C<ast> additionally  drops the C<make> when the method is a simple slast
expression.


     ast metachar:sym<:my> { Regex( $parse :qastnode :declarative) }

      # without.
      method metachar:sym<:my>($/) {
         my $past := $<statement>.ast;
         make QAST::Regex.new( $past, :rxtype('qastnode'), :subtype('declarative') );
     }

The nast keyword is similar to the NAST phaser so one can drop the C<:node($/)>

     nast metachar:sym<{ }> { Regex $<codeblock>.ast :qastnode }
